Hey everybody, it's Rachel. Before we
begin today's show, we wanted to bring
you the latest from central Texas. In
Texas tonight, a catastrophic flood
emergency. Months worth of torrential
rain fell in just a few hours in Kerr
County where flash flooding has killed
at least 80 people as of Sunday
afternoon. Dozens are still missing. The
desperate search for the missing after
deadly flash floods in Texas has become
a race against time. Among those
missing, a number of youth camps dot the
area, including Camp Mystic, are 10
girls from a summer camp along the
Guadalupe River. We will remain 100%
dedicated searching for every single one
of the children who were at Camp Mystic
as well as anybody else at the entire uh
riverbed to make sure that they're going
to be recovered.
I called our colleague Edgar Sandival
who's on the ground there to help us
understand what happened.
So, Edgar, it's 4 o'clock on Sunday
afternoon. Can you just tell us where
are you and what is the scene like
there? Right now, I'm in Kerville,
Texas. I came here as soon as I heard
that the floods have uh devastated the
parts of the community. And the scene
was just out of a a war zone. You could
see just hours later after the rain
started that it had taken entire
neighborhoods. Entire uh houses were
gone. There were smashed trees
everywhere. The roads were just broken
in many parts. And my first stop was at
a shelter in Kurville. And the first man
I saw was a man by the name of Brian
Ees.
He was wrapped in a blanket and trying
to light up a cigarette. and he started
to recount to me the ordeal that he went
through just a few hours earlier between
3 and 4:00 in the morning. The entire RV
park was just a torrential.
Do you live alone there? No, I was with
my wife. I have no idea if she's
He told me that him and his wife were
sleeping in an RV park near the
Guadalupe River. And then I looked
outside and seen how bad it was. So I
woke up my wife for us to get out. They
failed these raging waters just coming
seemingly out of nowhere. We got out of
the RV trying to make it to my truck. We
got swept away. Made it to another
truck. Oh wow. They got into a
neighbor's truck, the three of them.
They were trying to drive away. We went
about 20 ft and this truck died and then
we just got swept away. The water really
overwhelmed that truck as well. Wow. I I
just tried to keep my wife in the back
of the truck to protect us from all the
stuff that was floating. Just I mean it
was just torrential.
And then we got pushed out of the back
of the truck. We both went underwater.
Wow. You and your wife? Yeah, me and my
wife. I I she got ripped out of my arms
and uh I came up and I heard her and she
wasn't that far away from me so I tried
to swim to her and then I got hit in the
back of the head and got taken down by
more debris. Oh my god. Did a couple
tumbles underwater. I came up and I I
couldn't hear her no more
and I finally ran into a tree and I
wrapped myself around the tree. He swam
to shore and he was just hoping that she
grabbed into a tree or some sort of
large debris or a piece of refrigerator.
So I have no idea what happened to my
wife. I'm hoping she's and hours later
he was just desperately looking for her.
You don't have a picture. Your phone is
not with you. Amen. No, I have nothing.
I have no wallet. No, nothing. These
cigarettes, somebody that was here
earlier gave them to you came here for
the holiday. And sadly later on Friday
morning he was told that she did not
make it and had passed away.
[Music]
That is a really awful story and I
cannot even imagine how devastated that
must be for him and for the community.
I think one question on everybody's
minds right now is how did an overnight
rainstorm kill so many people so
quickly?
I mean that's the question everyone is
asking. This area is called flash flood
valley but the water really came out of
nowhere and in the span of a few hours
or 4 in the morning to about 6:00 in the
morning they got the amount of water
they would see in months. So people
didn't really have time to get out. Can
you talk a little bit more about the
kind of warnings that went out before
these floods began? Like why does it
seem like they did not come in time?
Well, I spoke to many residents who
began receiving the warnings like around
4:00 or 5 in the morning and a lot of
them tell me that at first they didn't
really make much of them and they only
started leaving their homes and their RV
trucks when the water reached their
floors and that's uh when they had to
escape and you know saved their lives. I
think there's going to be a lot of
debate in the coming days about who knew
what when, what could have been done
differently. Could people have been
warned and evacuated faster?
I know we don't have a lot of answers to
those questions now, but just as a
reporter on the ground there, seeing
what you're seeing, talking to
everybody, what has struck you about
what you've witnessed and this
particular tragedy?
I live not far from here and I've never
seen anything like this. Um, I grew up
along the border, which is also known
for it fair share of flash warnings and
floods, but this is just beyond what
anyone has experienced in their
lifetimes here.
I think the authorities are not really
trying to answer that question as well.
Every time they're pressed on it, they
keep telling us, the media, to just
focus on who's hurting right now and
finding the survivors and they're going
to quote unquote deal with this later.
But I think that's a question everyone
is desperately trying to answer at the
same time as they try to find their
loved ones.
Edgar, thank you so much. Thank you for
having me.
[Music]
Okay, here's today's show.
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
Last week, when Paramount, the parent
company of CBS News, announced a $16
million settlement to President Trump,
many of the network's journalists were
furious.
The deal also raised questions about the
independence of CBS's journalism and how
much news organizations could be cowed
by threats from the president going
forward.
Today, my colleague David Enrich takes
us inside the settlement and former CBS
producer Loel Burkeman reminds us that
CBS has been in this situation before
and explains why he thinks that this
time is different.
It's Monday, July 7th.
You ready for us? Um, I'm going to spit
up my gum. You came in here with gum? It
I almost came in here with martinis.
Okay. Well, uh, thank you for making
time for us since you are on deadline
and still reporting this out. Um, David,
let's start off with you just explaining
to us what this lawsuit is about. Well,
the lawsuit is about an allegation by
Trump that CBS, when it aired an
interview with Kla Harris last October,
deceptively edited it in a way that was
designed to make Kla Harris sound a lot
better than she really did. Mhm. Harris
had a reputation on the campaign trail
for not being always the most concise or
articulate public speaker. And for a
special election edition of 60 Minutes
that will air Monday, our Bill Whitaker
sat down with Vice President Harris and
asked CBS recorded this interview for 60
Minutes, but they teased the interview a
day earlier on another program. Does the
US have no sway over Prime Minister
Netanyahu?
The aid that we have given Israel
allowed Israel to defend itself against
200 ballistic missiles that were just
meant to attack the Israelis and the
people of Israel. And when we and on
that other program, Face the Nation, the
answer that Harris gave was different
than what CBS on 60 Minutes the
following evening showed. Does the US
have no sway over Prime Minister
Netanyahu? The work that we do
diplomatically with the leadership of
Israel is an ongoing pursuit around
making clear our principles. But it
seems that it was shorter and just
slightly different and it was edited the
way things on radio and TV are usually
edited to not bore viewers to death by
giving a whole long answer to something.
You know, we now know, you can look back
at the transcript and you can see that
they basically took the first half or
first twothirds of her answer, used that
on Face the Nation, and then 24 hours
later used the final third of it on 60
Minutes and
60 Minutes was just caught editing Kla
Harris's interview to make her answers
look better. It immediately led to a
bunch of conspiracy theories on social
media on the right. What they did was
put out this version with the word salad
about Israel first, saw the negative
reaction and say, "You know what? On TV,
that's not going to do good. So, let's
just change the answer alto together."
That CBS was kind of hiding what Kla
Harris had actually said or trying to
clean up her words to make her sound
better. And it was a conspiracy theory
that Trump and his allies really
deliberately fed. What they did with
her, I believe, is the biggest scandal
in broadcast history. I do. And you
know, it culminated 4 days before the
election with this lawsuit.
It's frankly a pretty tortured legal
argument that he's making. The lawsuit
was filed in Texas and he is claiming
that viewers of 60 Minutes in Texas who
watched this basically walked away with
the impression that Harris sounded a lot
more articulate than she did and that
that persuaded an untold number of Texas
voters, a state he won, a state he won
handily, that they nonetheless voted for
Harris instead of Trump as a result of
this allegedly doctorred interview.
That's a kind of a tenuous argument.
There's no evidence to support it
actually being true. Okay. So,
basically, you're saying this is like a
very weak case, in other words. Yeah.
And I I've been focusing on these types
of lawsuits for a couple of years now in
my job. And this is one of the weakest I
think that I I have seen.
Okay. So, Trump files the lawsuit right
before the election. The idea was that
if Harris ended up winning, then 60
Minutes would have intentionally helped
her to do so to the detriment of
candidate Trump. But obviously that did
not happen because he won. So I I don't
understand how is he still claiming that
he's somehow hurt by this. And Trump's
goal here was broader. Since the moment
he started campaigning for president in
2015, a central part of his shtick has
been bashing the media, sewing distrust
in the media, and he viewed this lawsuit
and his allies viewed this lawsuit as a
really powerful weapon to keep beating
the media with and to beat CBS over the
head with and also I think is designed
to a certain extent to send a message to
not just CBS but the mainstream media in
general that Trump is not going to just
stand by and get criticized in the
media. he is going to fight back as
aggressively as he can. And so instead
of walking away from the lawsuit, as you
might have expected, he not only
continued pursuing the lawsuit, but he
expanded it. He no longer was asking for
$10 billion in damages, he doubled that
to $20 billion. He added more
plaintiffs. They were really going full
steam on this. So the idea here is that
it's a super weak case that he's
pursuing, not because he might actually
win any monetary damages, but for all
these other reasons you just
articulated. Yeah. And there's one other
that I haven't articulated,
which is that the moment he won the
election, I think he sensed that he had
an added source of leverage against CBS
in particular, which was that CBS's
parent company, Paramount, which is
controlled by Sher Redstone, was in the
process of trying to merge with another
company, Sky Dance. And these two huge
entertainment companies, they needed the
federal government's approval to
complete their merger. And Trump was
about to take over the federal
government. And so he and his
administration in theory would have the
power to either approve or reject that
merger. And it was going to be very much
in the interest of CBS's parent company
to have a relationship with Trump that
was sufficiently positive that that
would not stand in the way of this
multi-billion dollar merger going
through. So basically, he feels like
there's going to be another reason for
them to capitulate, which it seems like
they did. That's exactly right. And that
is ultimately what happened. Trump's
instincts, I think, were right.
Paramount comes to the negotiating table
and to I think the surprise and
frustration of a lot of CBS employees
agrees to negotiate and now has agreed
to pay $16 million to Trump, his
lawyers, his future foundation.
CBS has also agreed as part of the
settlement to in the future when 60
Minutes interviews presidential
candidates, they will release full
unedited transcripts afterwards. Uh, is
that unusual? CBS hasn't done it in the
past and I think it is that's a pretty
easy concession for them to make because
it's clearly for the sake of
transparency. The transparency thing
makes sense to me because it is
spiritually aligned with the mission of
a journalistic organization. But the
overarching story here is one of CBS
capitulating as part of a lawsuit that
nobody thought had any merit. And so I'm
curious what the reaction has been
inside of CBS as all of this has been
going on for the last few months. Saying
they're upset would be a real
understatement. Our sacred rule of law
is under attack. Journalism is under
attack. The reaction has been really
apoplelectic. In tonight's last minute,
a note on Bill Owens, who until this
past week was executive producer of 60
Minutes. You've already seen some top
journalists at 60 Minutes either leave
like Bill Owens did. Bill resigned
Tuesday. It was hard on him and hard on
us, but he did it for us and you or
speak out against these settlement
negotiations like Scott P and Leslie
Stall have. To have a news organization
told
by a corporation, do this, do that with
your story. Change this, change that,
don't run that piece. I mean, it steps
on the First Amendment. It steps on the
freedom of the press. And one of the
things that they are especially worried
about is that this is going to set a
precedent both internally at CBS, but
for the broader news media in general.
I'm not optimistic. I am not. I'm
pessimistic. I'm pessimistic about the
future for all press today. That there
is a very clear playbook for people like
Trump when they are unhappy with
coverage or just want to cause trouble
internally at these news organizations
that they can file lawsuits that stand
very little chance of succeeding in
court and that their companies are going
to rush to the negotiating table and
agree to pay millions of dollars.
And the next step, the logical next step
is that companies do not like paying
millions of dollars in settlements. And
so the kind of rational thing to do in
that case is to stop writing things,
publishing things, airing things that
are going to upset the president because
you want to avoid getting these types of
frivolous lawsuits being filed in the
first place. And you talk to people at
CBS right now, people who are there, who
have recently left, and they've already
seen what they think are some signs that
CBS is going to be less willing to take
journalistic risks and go after the
richest, most powerful people in
institutions on the planet because they
are worried about the legal blowback
from this. Can you describe a few
examples of the signs that they've seen?
At 60 Minutes, there was a segment that
was due to air on the IRS and the cuts
that the Trump administration was making
to the IRS that got postponed by months.
Now, CBS people say that that was a
normal journalistic decision and it may
well have been, but that did not stop
the concerns from being raised
internally that this was part of a an
effort to kind of appease the Trump
administration. And certainly on the
Trump side and the people I talked to
there interpreted it that way. They
basically kind of thumped their chest
when they heard about this and saw it as
an indication that their pressure
tactics were working and that by doing
all this legal saber rattling, by filing
this lawsuit, by driving a tough
negotiating stance that they could
strongly influence the appetite that a
storied institution like CBS would have
to pursue hard-hitting, aggressive
investigative journalism, right? And
even if you don't know for certain that
a story is being killed, I imagine if
you work at CBS, it's just a cloud
hanging over you about why every
decision is being made. I mean, even and
wouldn't it be easier to just shy away
from that really hard story or just dial
it back a little bit if that will make
it easier for your story to air? And
it's that kind of infectious
self-censorship that I think a lot of
people at CBS and in the broader news
industry are really worried is that it's
going to take hold. And I think based on
my reporting that that's exactly what
Trump and his allies are hoping will
happen. We should mention though at
least CBS is saying that of course that
this will not change their news
standards. But what you are saying is
that there are signs that that is just
not true or at least people within CBS
have reason to be suspicious already. I
think they have good reason to be
suspicious. And look, I've been
reporting on these types of legal
threats and legal actions in the news
industry across the US, and it's the
same pattern over and over again.
Organizations reach settlements or
deals, they back down. And the line that
they say is that, you know, this is just
about being able to move on. And I think
it's not surprising to see why. It's
because it when you see how expensive it
is to defend against these lawsuits,
whether you're settling them or not, the
rational thing to do is to try to avoid
situations where you're going to face
intense legal blowback.
I have to note that all of what you just
described sounds a lot like the plot of
a movie. In fact, it is the plot of a
movie. An insider ready to speak the
truth. The movie is called The Insider.
It came out in the '90s. a reporter who
will help him reveal it. What is this?
And it is about Lol Bergman, a
journalist at CBS 60 Minutes, who
basically gets his story killed because
of the interest of his corporate parent.
It will pin you to your seat. The best
film of the year, nominated for five
gold. Have you seen this movie? I love
that movie. And I agree. History
sometimes repeats itself. And there are
a lot of indications here that what CBS
is doing right now to appease Trump and
get a deal done for its corporate parent
is a repeat of what happened in the
insider with the tobacco coverage and
LOL Bergman's story decades earlier.
[Music]
What would you say if I told you that we
were going to talk to LOL Bergman in the
second half of this episode? I would say
tell him I'm a huge fan.
David Enrich, thank you so much. Thanks
for having me
after the break. Lolbergman.
We'll be right back.
Lol. Bergman, it is such an honor to
have you here. I'm actually just
interviewing you to make Michael Barbaro
jealous because he just referred to you
as the greatest television news producer
of all time. Send money.
Um, well, hello. Welcome to the Daily.
Lol. We are talking to you on the heels
of this huge settlement that came down
on Tuesday night for $16 million. And
before we get into the guts of it, I
want to hear what was your reaction when
you heard this news? Well, I think we
all expected a settlement. I suppose the
question was the dollar amount.
Paramount was going to do something to
pay off uh Donald Trump in order to get
the merger so Miss Redstone could get
her money. That seemed to be written in
stone that that was something was going
to happen like that for 60 Minutes. I
think for those of us in journalism, it
didn't matter how much money it was one
way or another.
I imagine this kind of capitulation from
Paramount feels slightly familiar to you
at least thematically because this gets
why we really wanted to talk to you
which is that I recently watched the
insider at the suggestion of my
colleague Michael Barbaro because he
said that the situation with CBS is
exactly like the insider and I said
what's the insider and I watched it uh
my name is L Bergman say no Bergman B E
R G M an I'm a producer of 60 Minutes.
And of course, this is the film where
Alpuchccino plays you when you were a
producer at CBS. Yes. Is it newsworthy?
Yes. Are we going to air it? Of course
not. Why? And I was so struck by some of
the similarities. You won't be satisfied
unless you're putting the company at
risk. What are you? Are you a
businessman or are you a newsman?
Because that happened. And so I would
like to ask you,
could you tell me the story of what
happened when you were there at CBS? In
my case, I was a producer at 60 minutes
for at that time about 12 years.
[Music]
How the medical establishment found out
what AIDS was at and had enjoyed the
backing of the company legacy of what he
calls drug trafficking by the CIA in
partnership with the Venezuelan national
and had done a number of stories all
around the world. Seldom do western
reporters get a chance as we did last
week to go behind the barricades that
separate the rest of Beirut from a for
some of whom were honored with awards
but at the same time it was a job that I
was really deep into and in the course
of doing that I was notified by a source
that there was someone inside the
tobacco industry who had been a senior
executive in a company willing to talk
that had never happen.
And I cultivated this source with the
full knowledge of the company with the
legal department because in those days
the tobacco industry was spending $600
million a year on litigation trying to
keep the untruth that tobacco wasn't
addictive, that it wasn't damaging the
public health. And CBS had previously
been sued by Brown and Williams Tobacco
and and lost a $3 million case in
Chicago. So there was a lot of tension
in those days about the tobacco industry
litigation and doing stories like that.
And this whistleblower had a bombshell
which was to refute this narrative that
the tobacco industry had been pushing.
Right. The executive had documents that
showed that their own company had
reverse engineered a Malboro cigarette
and had determined that there was a use
of additives that caused the nicotine to
get into the bloodstream faster through
the lungs. And that's why people like to
get to their Marorrow so fast because
their addiction would be fulfilled by
buying and smoking a Marorrow cigarette.
[Music]
It took me a year and a half to get him
to go on the record. And when that took
place in the summer of 1995, there's a
meeting with the general counsel. And
the general counsel came up with this
conclusion that we had torchiously
interfered with the contract that our
source Jeffrey Wand had signed, which
was a non-disclosure agreement. They
told us that we would get sued in
Kentucky because we had violated his
contract and had conspired to violate
his contract and assist him in doing
that and a jury would come back and the
Brown and Williams of Tobacco would wind
up owning CBS and therefore you couldn't
do the story. It was too risky. So I
called the president of CBS News and I
at 9:00 in the morning on October 3rd,
and I said to him, "These are just
lawyers.
What does CBS News say?" And he said,
"The corporation will not risk its
assets on this story." A footnote to the
controversy about the tobacco piece. So
it did not run. We were dismayed that
the management at CBS had seen fit to
give in to perceived threats of legal
action against us by a tobacco industry
giant. We broadcast. So the bottom line
is you have this great source that has
agreed to go on the record about what
have been a huge bombshell that the
tobacco companies were intentionally
trying to make the product more
addictive and the lawyers that you're
dealing with internally are saying don't
publish this. We'll get sued. It's too
risky. And 60 Minutes agrees not to
publish. I would say the lawyer in
charge said that. The lawyer in charge.
What was your reaction to that at the
time? My reaction I mean I could have
quit right there and then. I decided not
to. I decided to fight
using any means necessary that I could
gather to reverse what had happened.
I promised myself I would get out the
story of what did happen. Mhm. because
this is information about the public
health, people who were dying from the
effects of nicotine addiction.
So it was outrageous I think to everyone
involved actually that we couldn't run
the story especially because we had
found a source, a unique thing, a unique
person because no one else in the
industry was available to talk about
whatever they did inside that industry.
And then the documents did get out there
uh separately and the story itself was
vindicated by a leak of a deposition
that appeared on the front page of the
Wall Street Journal. Everything we knew
was public.
CBS management wouldn't let us broadcast
our original story and our interview
with Jeffrey Wan because they were
worried about the possibility of a
multi-billion dollar lawsuit against us
for torchious interference. But now
things have changed and that's when it
finally four months later was put on the
air. Part of the reason I'm here is I
felt that their representation clearly
misstated what they commonly knew as
language within the company. We're in a
nicotine delivery business and that's
what cigarettes are for. Most certainly
it's a delivery device for nicotine. A
delivery because the story ran out early
February of 1996. Finally other people
came out and we did further stories.
People from the industry began talking
and so on.
Why do you think though that 60 Minutes
producers agreed to kill the story
initially? Like this is obviously a
Tiffany brand of journalism. I think
people like myself especially associate
60 Minutes with a fierce commitment to
independent journalism. Why do you think
this was some sort of limit for them?
All news organizations have the limits
as to what they will publish or push out
even if it's true. They'll say that they
will follow any story wherever it goes
without fear or favor or with the costs
involved. Uh that's simply not true in a
number of different cases. In my case,
there are a number of issues involved.
One of one of the issues was that Larry
Tish and the Tish family who owned and
controlled CBS at that point also owned
and controlled Laurelard to Tobacco. And
when you that famous scene where you see
the seven dwarfs raise their arm and
say, "I believe that nicotine is not
addictive." One of them is the son of
Larry Tish. These are the seven tobacco
executives that testified in front of
Congress. Right. And so the the issue of
the uh ownership of stations by major
corporate conglomerates was in the
background here. Okay. That was
something by the way that would not have
happened 20 years earlier. There were
there were regulations against that. So
basically what the situation you're
describing was that the corporate
interests of CBS at the time outweighed
the journalism. That's essentially what
happened. Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly.
So, when you think back on the story
that you've just told us, do you think
that what has just happened with the
settlement with President Trump, does it
feel to you like history is repeating
itself?
In a way, but I think it's a lot worse.
Can you explain why? Well, we know that
recently ABC capitulated in a case
involving George Stephanopoulos, which
was weak. This case was even weaker in
terms of the courts, right? Every legal
expert thought it was sort of nonsense,
right? It's nonsense. It's done to
intimidate. And so the result will be
that you have litigation and it becomes
all consuming when you're in the middle
of it. And it's not like a case
involving tobacco. And the pressure that
was coming down was easy to see where it
would be coming from. This is the
president of the United States. Th this
is without precedent in the history of
this country. I just want to push back
though a little bit.
What does it matter if Trump tries to
intimidate the press and CBS says in
this settlement, "We are not changing
our news standards. We might be paying
you something, but if the coverage
doesn't change, why does this matter?"
The words are parsed in a way to try and
tell you, "Don't worry, don't worry,
we're just paying X amount of money to
settle this. It's just a minor thing."
The fact is is that anyone working at 60
Minutes from now on has to worry about
what is going to be allowed on the air
at a level that's how should I put it
not acceptable. 60 Minutes had a pretty
good run after this whole fiasco over
Jeffrey Wan. the sky didn't fall, right?
And I just sort of wonder, is it
possible that things will be okay at
some point after this also?
Well, we can hope so,
but I would say you've got to think
twice, three times, four times before
you get yourself into a story that might
be controversial. and the new owners who
are coming in who are going to buy do
not have a long tradition of being in
the news business or being respectful of
the traditions that it represents.
We're at a really grim moment when
absurd lawsuits
and huge amounts of money come together
to damage the public interest.
So, I would say you got to be a little
bit depressed about what the future
holds.
[Music]
Lol. Burkeman, thank you so much for
speaking with us. Thank you. Bye-bye.
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today.
Authorities said that a police officer
was shot outside an Immigration and
Customs Enforcement detention facility
in Texas late Friday night while a group
of about 15 people had slashed the tires
on federal vehicles and vandalized
security cameras.
The detention center about 28 mi south
of Fort Worth holds people who are
awaiting deportation or are accused of
violating immigration laws. Several
people were taken into custody in
connection with the incident. While
their motives remain unclear, the
shooting comes amid nationwide protests
against the Trump administration's
aggressive deportation tactics.
Today's episode was produced by Rob
Zipco, Caitlyn O'Keefe, Sydney Harper,
Nina Feldman, and Michael Simon Johnson.
It was edited by Lexi Dio and Paige
Cowitt with research help from Susan
Lee. contains original music by Pat
McCusker, Diane Wong, Marian Lozano,
Rowan Nisto, and Dan Powell, and was
engineered by Chris Wood. Our theme
music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben
Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]